All right so before we get started I feel like it's important that you know at least the basic idea
of how the process of getting and loading a web page in your browser works.
So for some of you this may be very simple you may already know this stuff for some of you this may
be very confusing and daunting if it is confusing just know that you'll understand this process more
as time goes on and you don't need to know it to start building Web sites.
I think a good metaphor for this is that you don't need to know how an engine works to be able to to
learn how to drive a car and the stuff that I'm going to talk about here in this in this section.
It all happens under the hood.
So if you're a beginner and you're just stepping into this world don't worry if you don't understand
this stuff.
I just think it's important to mention before we start.
All right.
So we all use the Internet every day but most people don't know how it actually works.
And they just know they go to you know Facebook dot com or whatever and it loads their profile their
social media.
So I'm going to try to explain what actually goes on under the hood in very simple terms.
Basically the internet is a global network of computers and devices and these computers have what's
called an IP address to uniquely identify them just like an actual address for your home.
And these IP addresses they're assigned to you by your Internet service providers and they're usually
in the form of four numbers with dots in between just like this here and now this is a version for IP
address.
There's also Version 6 IP addresses that are much longer and these were created for when we run out
of version for IP addresses and you can actually go to Google and just search what's my IP and you'll
find different sites that will actually trace it and show it to you if you want to know what your current
IP addresses.
Now even if you have multiple devices in your home like let's say you have two computers a tablet a
mobile device each of these devices they all have what's called a private IP address that is only local
to your network your home network your router however has a public IP address and that's the IP address
that the Internet actually sees all the private ones for each device.
That's only within your home network or Europe in your office network whatever it may be.
All right.
Now the way that computers talk to each other is over something called the T C.P. IP protocol and a
protocol is basically just a way for computers to communicate almost like a language that's so they
can speak to each other.
Don't worry too much about this.
If you're getting into computer networking and stuff like that it's very important to understand the
different network layers and so on how data packets are sent.
But that's not important for what we're doing here or even to become a web developer.
Now HDP is a little more important for you to understand this stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol.
And if you notice when you type in a Web site you are all like Google dot com Facebook.
You're usually doing it HDP or H TTP S. HDP S is for secure connections using an SSL certificate.
And we'll talk more about that later.
But basically HDP is what's called an application layer protocol and it actually runs over TCB and it's
responsible for handling web traffic between a browser like Google Chrome or Firefox and a web server
that stores a Web site.
And we'll talk more about that in the next slide.
So HDP is one of many types of application layer protocols.
You also have for instance S.M. A.P. which deals with e-mail.
You have FTC and SSA each.
These these deal with transferring files over the Internet HDP however is going to be the one you deal
with the most in web development.
So Web sites and Web pages are basically just files that are stored on computers that run a piece of
software called a web server.
And an example of a web server would be Apache or engine x.
Don't worry if you've never heard of these before technically you could run a web server from your home
on a computer.
But most ISP prohibit doing that and you probably wouldn't want to do that anyways because if for some
reason the computer shuts off or something happens your Web site goes down.
So what you usually do is you you can build a Web site on your local machine at your home or office
and then you would upload it to a hosting company K or to a server that a hosting company owns and there's
all different types of hosting accounts you can actually get a dedicated server which is an actual computer
that's dedicated to to you for your use.
But those are really expensive.
You have shared hosting where you share accounts on one server with other people.
This is this is much cheaper and I'll go over the different types of hosting in a later section but
that's basically what you're going to do is use a hosting company.
And in addition to that you're going to need a domain name which can be a dot com dot net dawg and many
other tell these now.
Remember all computers including web servers have an IP address but it would really suck if you wanted
to go to Facebook or Google and you had to remember something like 7 5 2 2 1 2 8 1 3 1.
So what happens is when you type in for instance HDP colon slash slash W WW w dot Facebook dot com there's
something called a DNS or a domain name service that actually maps that domain to the correct IP address
of Facebook dot com or whatever website you're visiting.
And this makes our lives much easier otherwise you'd probably have to have a notebook with you know
hundreds of numbers for each Web site that you want to visit.
So later on I'm actually going to show you how to register a domain name and how to upload a Web site
to a Web hosting account.
All right.
So let's take a quick look at a diagram that kind of explains what we've been talking about.
So you the user down at the bottom types in let's say Google dot com into a web browser and this could
be Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox Safari any web browser and the DNS server looks at the domain
names such as Google dot com and it maps it to the IP address that's needed.
As you can see right here.
OK.
Once it gets that IP address it then makes a what's called an H GDP request to the web server of that
IP address and then that web server will return it will return a response with the html file that needs
to be load any other files including C Ss files which are used for styling.
You have any images that that are on the page those will get sent and whatever else is needed for Google
dot com to be loaded in your browser.
Now these HDP requests They're made when you load a web page as well as when you for instance submit
a form.
And there's different types of requests there's different status codes but that's all stuff you're going
to learn later on when you get into scripting and programming.
You don't need to know that stuff to create basic static web pages with each team Alan CSX.
OK so this is obviously a very brief summary and there's a lot more that goes into it it's much more
intricate when you get into networking layers and so on.
But that again that's not stuff that you guys need to know right now.
One thing about web development in general is it can be very overwhelming because there's just so many
different technologies to learn.
But H.C. Mellon CSX the they are the building blocks of all Web sites and web applications.
So in the next video I want to talk more about the roles of each team Alan CSX.